Course Introduction
===================

Physics is the fundamental nature of the universe. In this first semester of
physics, the student has the opportunity to refine his or her notion of motion
as we inquire into the nature of speed, acceleration, force, mass, inertia,
spin, and energy. The points of the course are to understand the physics
underlying natural phenomena, to mathematically model those phenomena, and to
solve quantitative problems.

In the first semester of physics, we learn that every motion is described by
Newton's motion equation: when you put a force on a mass, it will accelerate.
Upon completion of the first semester course, students are able to
quantitatively describe the motions, forces, and energies involved in such
things as vehicles, machinery, animals, and planets and understand that
Newton's motion equation is all that is needed to model each of these
examples-and all others, too. The student will also be able to describe the
flow of energy in the Sun, Earth, animal, home, factory, and civilization and
understand that the flow of energy is the basis of every process in the
universe.

In the second semester we learn that electricity and magnetism are two of the
five forces found to exist in nature. The electric force binds atoms and
molecules, keeps you from falling through the floor, and is the force behind
springs and rubber bands. Static electricity is used in xerox machines,
provides the cling of plastic food-wrap, and removes precipitants in smoke
stacks. We study the equations behind electric and magnetic phenomena and
machinery, including circuits, rainbows, sunsets, mirages, radio devices,
infra-red light, x-ray light, radar, mirrors, lenses, lightning, eels, neurons,
and the cause of the colors seen in the blue sky, tomatoes, and rubies.
Students will be able to describe these things quantitatively, and students
will understand that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon. We will see that
these equations were found by James Maxwell in the year 1865. Nobody in the
year 1865 could imagine the endless uses of these equations. They are a
fundamental truth of nature and will be useful to all humans for the rest of
time.

Course philosophy: We do whatever is needed to learn
----------------------------------------------------

This course is intended to provide a foundation for logical reasoning, for
future science courses, and for use in daily life. In today's technological
world, citizens should be scientifically literate because each of us uses a
machine every few minutes. The fully informed citizen is equally versed in
politics, art, sports, history, and science. The daily news mentions
nanotechnology, genetic engineering, cloning, fusion energy, Black Holes,
nuclear energy, superstrings, and global warming. Scientifically literate
citizens understand the basis and goals of these things as well as they
understand the intricacies of a political campaign, social relations, and
sports tactics. With each thing we learn and with each ability we acquire, we
become a more full person and are able to better contribute to the mutual
efforts that are our human civilization.

Science consists of facts and understandings obtained from repeatable
measurements. Billions of measurements have been made involving millions of
natural phenomena, but we can now explain them all in terms of a handful of
fundamental principles, including evolution, the conservation of energy, and
the half-dozen equations of Newton, Maxwell, and Schroedinger. This is
intellectually rewarding. (Physics forms the core of nature; we are surrounded
by endless examples of physics and will study hundreds of them this semester.)
In addition, if a phenomenon can be repeatably observed and measured then that
aspect of nature can often be harnessed to make a useful machine or medicine.
Scientists are often motivated by their desire to understand nature and by
their desire to make everyday life better for all of us. The discoverers of
electricity and antibiotics and the inventors of steam engines, telephones, and
computers changed our lives while emperors cause only temporary shifts in maps
and do not change our lives.

The LSMSA faculty strives to promote wonder in students by demonstrating our
own passion for learning; we hope "not simply to fill empty vessels but to
light fires." We want to help students find 11that field of study which grabs
their passion and fires them up for a lifetime of study, work, and
contribution. We want students to pursue the limits of their interests and
abilities and contribute fully to the mutual efforts that are our society-to
help make the world a better place for all of us.

Acknowledgments
---------------

Some of the examples within are problems from the physics textbooks by Hewitt,
Zitewitz, Tipler, Sears and Young, Jones and Childrers, and Haliday, Resnick,
and Walker . Everyday physics is discussed in The Flying Circus of Physics (FC)
by Jearl Walker and Color and Light in Nature (Lynch) by David K. Lynch and
William Lingston.

First-year physics students see the letter 'v' and then internally pronounces
'vee', while a second-year student internally pronounces the same letter as
"velocity" or "the rate of change of position." It takes a few months for each
new symbol to become mental shorthand for a physical concept rather than just
being a letter of the alphabet. For this reason, I'll take the advice of Serway
and Faughn and help the new student properly pronounce new equations. During
class, the physics teacher must be sure to pronounce 'v' as "velocity" rather
than as "vee."

I'll also take Paul Hewitt's advice of using "Check your neighbor" questions
(shown below as Daily Work, "CQ," or "conceptual question"), but have each
student write his or her own answer on a sheet of paper that will be turned in
at the end of the day. The sheet will contain answers to the day's questions.
The sheets will also serve as Charles Schwartz's "minute papers" in that they
allow the teacher to gauge the clarity of the day's lecture. If few students
answer correctly then the teacher knows to discuss that topic in another way
during the next class meeting. The teacher will then not have to wait until
test day to measure the understanding of the students. Asking students to
simply put numbers into each newly encountered equation might help them become
familiar with its basic meaning.

Each chapter of this book begins with a lengthy discussion, followed by a short
listing of the order of classroom topics, and then definitions that are meant
for your review when preparing for tests.

syllabus, office hours, course grading scheme

study technique to get A grades: class notes record everything said or written,
rewrite notes that night, take notes while reading the textbook, accumulate a
list of physical quantities, definition, relations

You'll work problems in class each day and turn them in at the end of the day.
While doing those in- class problems, compare your answers to those of your
neighbor and discuss any differences.

Assignment: Study the Greek alphabet, see
http://greek-language.com/Alphabet.html. See first 20 minutes of the video
\0p\day-1-2-combined.m2t

The goals of the physics course are for you to understand physical concepts
such as velocity, acceleration, mass, force, energy, and momentum and such, to
understand their mathematical relations, and to be able to solve the standard
problems such as those given in the text. The textbooks create uniform topics
for the one-year courses in calculus- or trig-based physics. Physics courses
will then contains the same material even though they are occurring in a few
thousand colleges throughout the nation and planet. In many LA colleges, you
get college credit for the physics course you are now taking. Otherwise, take
the AP exam or test out of the course.

My experience with Math and Science School students has found that you are
bright, talented, tolerant, motivated, self-disciplined, polite, and respectful
towards others. You enjoy learning, and will be successful both in life and in
whatever career you choose for yourself. You are happy to finally be surrounded
by other students who like to learn, you like to live with your friends right
down the hall, and you are forming lifelong friendships. Our students are
wonderful people. LSMSA is a boarding school that is an educational utopia of a
few hundred warm friends who are intellectually curious and share a joy in
learning. We have the dream students.

As with every thing a person learns to do-from walking, throwing, and bicycling
to multiplying and saxaphoning-a few hundred hours of effort through a few
months are needed to produce sufficient neuronal connections to get us started.
In this course, too, a person has to invest about that amount of time to
acquire the ability to model phenomena with equations and to logically reason
through such situations as occurs in the trajectory of a space ship on its way
to Saturn. While enrolled in college courses, math and science students study
60 hours per week. After a few years and a few thousand hours of effort in a
particular activity, a person is becoming an expert. Through the upcoming
years, you will become an expert in your chosen field.

You will learn the maximum amount if you read the chapter before coming to
class, take notes from the textbook, take class notes in which you write down
everything that the instructor says, rewrite your notes, and review before the
test. If your test score is lower than you prefer then double the number of
hours per day that you study for the course. If your next score is still lower
than you prefer then you should once again double the number of hours per day
that you study for the course. After doubling one hour to two, then four, and
then eight you will be happy with your test grades. You may have earned 'A'
grades at your previous school by studying just one hour per week, but will
likely have to study 20 hours per week here at our school and even more in grad
school. Manage your time, see http://www.lsmsa.edu/content.cfm?id=337 and take
the counselor's study and note-taking advice so that you do not have to learn
the hard way, see http://www.lsmsa.edu/content.cfm?id=338.

Your understanding of physics depends on little else besides the number of
problems that you think about and try to solve. Follow the suggested problem
solving procedure, as described below. Keep up with assignments by managing
your time. Test preparation accumulates each day. Make notes to yourself as if
you are explaining to a person (yourself) who is studying the night before a
test. The comments and reminders that you place in your notes help you prepare
for tests and help when you review the material during future courses. In the
first few pages of your notebook, accumulate a list of physical quantities and
equations. The list that you accumulate will be due on test days.

Each day in your notebook, write down the chapter and date and then everything
that is written on the board. In your notes, try to explain to yourself the
physical reasoning discussed in the lectures. It works wonders if, at the end
of the day, you rewrite your notes.

#) Form problem solving groups but be sure to work and understand each problem
   yourself. Group members can help each other learn by questioning each other
   and by explaining to each other. Prepare before hand so that you can
   contribute.

#) We learn physics mostly by doing (90%) and much less by watching the teacher
   (10%). About 90% of what you learn in this course, you'll learn while
   struggling for a couple hundred hours to solve homework problems. The
   remaining 10% of your understanding is obtained from listening to the
   teacher and watching him or her solve problems. The student has to exert
   mental effort to make sense of the material. While exerting effort, the
   necessary new neuronal connections are being made and forming knowledge and
   understanding. As it is said, you become neither strong nor knowledgeable by
   watching other people work. Golden words do not exist that a teacher can say
   to instantly impart understanding within you. About all that the teacher can
   do is to direct your efforts. Your understanding depends on little else
   besides the number of problems that you think about and try to solve.
   Mistakes are a natural part of the learning process. Don't be too concerned
   about mistakes because we learn by making them: we profit from them. When an
   expert in one field tries to solve problems in another field, the expert
   makes the same sort of errors as does the novice. Every problem is solved
   after some fumbling in the dark. It is known that we learn best when
   surprised.

#) Follow the suggested problem solving procedure shown below.

#) Keep up with assignments by managing your time. Daily study is much more
   effective than intensive stretches done only on the night before an
   examination. Do not try to wait until the last moment and then cram for an
   exam. To help you plan your study time, previous students have reported that
   it typically takes 10 minutes to solve each problem. Many problems are done
   in two minutes but some take 30 minutes. The general rule of thumb is for
   students to spend two hours of time outside class for each hour spent inside
   class. As you progress through college, the time required to solve each
   problem grows to one hour and then to several hours. Science students in
   college study 40-80 hours per week.

Problem-solving procedure and study technique for physics
---------------------------------------------------------

Every beginning student of physics tries at first to solve problems by reading
the question, grabbing a pencil, and writing :math:`3 \cos(24) + 7 \sin(15)`. But
this approach rarely works as it requires you to solve the entire problem in
your head. This causes unnecessary confusion and frustration. Through future
years of study, problems get increasingly long: Each of this year's problems
take 10 minutes to solve, next year's take one hour, and the problems of the
years after that take 10 to 100 hours to solve. We can't solely plan within our
heads the blueprints for a building. We all learn the hard way that we are more
successful at solving problems if we follow an organized, step by step
approach.

#) Draw a picture to explain the problem and indicate the axes and their
   origins in the sketch (unless the problem involves nothing more than
   plugging numbers into an equation). This helps keep arithmetic signs
   consistent throughout the solution. Indicate the meaning of the symbols in
   the sketch. For example, when h = building height, show :math:`h` next to
   the drawn rectangle.

#) List given and unknown quantities, and including units. For example,
   :math:`F = -3 N, m = 3 kg, a = ?`.
   
#) Describe your physical reasoning in a written sentence. When you review your
   solution in the future, you'll be grateful that you had. For example, "the
   force of ground friction slows the box."

#) Write equations relating the known and unknown quantities. For example,
   :math:`F = ma`.

#) Algebraically solve equations for unknowns before plugging in numerical
   values. For example, a=F/m

#) Plug the numbers into your final algebraic equation and then box your final
   answer. For example, :math:`a = \frac{F}{m} = -3 \frac{N}{3} \, kg = -1 \,
   \frac{m}{s^2}`.

#) Make sure your answer is reasonable and that it has the correct dimensions.
   
You should consider your homework solutions to be notes that you have written
to yourself to be read the night before the test. Use sentences to explain to
yourself the physics behind the numerical solution. Homework solutions that
consist of nothing but numbers will be of no use to you when studying the night
before a test. When you study the night before a test, read the homework
problem, try to write the physics equation that describes that situation,
compare your equation to the first line of your homework solution, and then
stop. Don't spend any test preparation time doing arithmetic or algebra because
you know that you'll do those things just fine on the test. Instead, spend your
test preparation time just setting up the solutions to a great number of
homework problems.
