One-dimensional motion
======================

We want to understand the meanings of time, `distance
<http://www.alcyone.com/max/physics/orders/metre.html>`_, speed, velocity, and
acceleration. We all have some experience with motion but, as for many aspects
of daily life, we have a somewhat vague notion of this common event. We have
all driven from our home to a friend's house but we never had any reason to get
our rulers and stopwatches to carefully quantify motion beyond our relative
words of fast and slow, moving or stopped. As we measure specific aspects of
nature, we are always surprised that it is not exactly what we had assumed. We
are surprised by the results of measurements. Science means "facts and
understandings obtained from repeatable measurements-billions of measurements
have been made." These are the most important points of the course.

CQ: Write on a sheet of paper to turn in at the end of the class time. Take 15
seconds to answer each of the following questions. What sort of things have you
seen in motion? Which things can you see moving right now? Describe "distance."
How much time elapses between heartbeats? How much time is spent shaking your
head? Describe something you can do in 1 second. In 10. In 100. For how long
does a thrown ball stay in the air? How long does it take you to walk up a
flight of stairs? How long does it take a car to traverse a highway on-ramp?
How long does it take a rock dropped from shoulder-height to hit the ground?
How long will a horizontally-shot bullet stay in the air? Do you believe that
the dropped rock and fired bullet both take the same amount of time to fall to
the ground? Nature surprises us. We will be surprised in every chapter. In this
chapter, we will refine our notion of motion.


Imagine for a moment a world in which nothing is moving-no cars, trains, or
planes in motion, not even a strolling animal or a bush blowing in the wind.
Just 150 years ago-before we developed engines for trains and such-very few
objects were in motion besides people and animals. Since it is only living
things that can move themselves of their own accord, about the only other
objects in motion were the wind, rising smoke, rivers, clouds, and falling
rain. Ask tribes-people why clouds move and they might answer "Because that's
what they like to do." This makes sense to me. When our earliest natural
philosophers pondered the nature of motion, they had only the motions of these
few objects to explain. Empedocles (490 - 430 BCE) and Aristotle (384 - 322
BCE) explained these motions in terms of things seeking their own level in
matter's hierarchy of water, earth, air, fire, and heavens.

CQ: Do stars, comets, and planets move? Can you think of other things that
move? Do they move of their own accord?

They also asked what is it that temporarily keeps a rock moving after you have
thrown it. How would you explain it? Our first moving machinery-sailboats and
grinding mills, for example-were pushed or pulled by people, animals, wind, or
water. They moved only as something else pushed them. Back around the year
1850, the first time people saw a train moving under its own power they
typically said that they were astonished because "It moved just like a living
thing." Before the train, only living things could move under their own power.
We are constantly in motion today, driving around town and flying around the
continents, but just a couple centuries ago, a busy city was filled only with
foot traffic and some horse- or people-drawn carts. The city contained only
motionless buildings. In this Wisconsin Historical Society photo, foot traffic
in an otherwise motionless city is seen as people walk to work at a Chicago
factory in 1886. Copy the following URL into your browser to see the caption
for this photo.

http://www.wisconsinhistory.org/whi/fullRecord.asp?id=24888&qstring=http%3A%2F%2Fwww%2Ewisconsinhistory%2Eorg%2Fwhi%2Fresults%2Easp%3Fkeyword1%3D24888%26search%5Ffield1%3Dimage%255Fid%26search%5Ftype%3Dadvanced%26sort%5Fby%3Ddate%26boolean%5Ftype1%3Dand%26boolean%5Ftype2%3Dand

By the way, animals are naturally equipped to detect the motion of other
objects because such movement often is of biological consequence. We also
quickly learn to ignore those motions which are of no biological consequence,
such as the swaying of grass in the wind, though we still might still enjoy
such a sight in a mountain meadow. But our animal senses are easily fooled.
Akiyoshi Kitaoka from the Ritsumeikan University in Kyoto, Japan demonstrates
that sometimes motion is just an illusion. Motion is also art in interactive
exhibits, movement, dance, and in kinetic sculptures. Motion can be frozen in
time.

Motion is a fundamental aspect of nature, but what exactly is the nature of
motion? While driving your car past trees and such, has it ever seemed to you
that you are motionless and that instead it is the objects outside the car that
are moving past you? From your point of view, are you in motion or are the
passing tress and such in motion?

CQ: Are or are not those trees in motion?

Motion involves relative movement. While driving your car for example, you and
your passengers are not in motion relative to each other but you are in motion
relative to the ground, less so relative to other cars you pass, and about
twice so relative to oncoming cars.

Can you be in motion without knowing it? You may have noticed that if you close
your eyes while riding in a car, you are unaware of the car's constant speed
but do sense its changes in motion (termed "acceleration"). We feel the
acceleration as the car seat pushes us forward. We also feel acceleration as an
elevator begins moving and later slows to a stop. But without sensing it at
all, we are in motion as the Earth spins in its daily cycle and travels in its
annual path around the Sun; at the same time, the Solar System orbits the
center of the galaxy, and the galaxies are moving away from each other within
the expanding universe. How would you quantify motion?

The motion experiments of Galileo
---------------------------------

Galileo was among the first persons to experimentally study motion. His work
began to reveal to us the true nature of motion. He is the hero of this
chapter. Galileo (1564-1642) and Shakespeare were both born in the same year.
(This is also the year that Michelangelo died.) Some 78 years later, Galileo
died during the same year that Newton was born (not fig Newton but Isaac
Newton, who is the hero of the next chapter).

Around the year 1590, Galileo 2 began to quantify motion by measuring the time
needed for rolling balls to travel given distances along tilted pathways or
inclined planes. The steeper the incline, the faster the balls will travel. At
the time, there were variously named units of distance-cubits and leagues, for
example-and the day had been divided into twenty-four hours but no clocks yet
existed that counted the tiny intervals we call seconds. The day was divided
only into morning, noon, afternoon, and evening and such. Galileo made his
measurements of motion before second-hands existed on clocks. He measured time
intervals by counting heartbeats, water drops, and pendulum swings. By the way,
what causes the oscillatory motion of a pendulum?

Dropped objects take only a fraction of a second to fall to the ground; it is
hard to time such a short interval by counting fractions of heartbeats. Galileo
used inclined planes to stretch the time duration of the motion. The less steep
the incline, the longer will be the duration of the motion.

Speed represents a distance traveled divided by the time taken to travel that
distance. For a modern example, driving at 60 mph means that we traverse a
distance of 60 miles in one hour. Galileo quantified motion in terms of
distance traversed in each of a series of, for example, three-heartbeat time
units. That is, what distance was covered in the first three-heartbeat time
period and what distance was covered in the second three-heartbeat time period,
and the third, and so on. Galileo defined acceleration to be the change in
speed per unit time. (While driving our car, we say that we press the
accelerator to speed up.)

CQ: Suppose you begin from a stopped position to drive down a highway on-ramp,
you traverse a small distance during the first three-heartbeat time unit (write
down an estimate of this distance), a larger distance through the next
three-heartbeat time unit (write down an estimate of this distance), and a yet
larger distance through the next (write down an estimate of this distance) as
your speed increases from slow to fast and then faster.

Galileo found that as a ball rolls down an inclined plane, its speed increases
linearly in time -- it is accelerating -- but its position increases as the
square of time. Mathematically, these are written :math:`v \propto t` and
:math:`x \propto t^2`. Using the letter 'a' as the constant of proportionality,
these two relations are also written :math:`v = at` and :math:`x = \frac{1}{2}
at^2`.

CQ: Would you have guessed before making these measurements that nature behaves
in this specific, mathematical way? Would you expect nature to behave in a
mathematical way in any situation?

Luckily, these speed and acceleration equations hold no matter what object-from
wooden spheres to metal cylinders-rolls down the inclined plane. They also hold
whether the incline is set nearly horizontal or completely vertical, which then
results in "free-fall" motion. In the year 1632, Galileo published his results
in Dialogue Concerning Two New Sciences. Before Galileo, nobody had stumbled
across the importance of the time rate of change of speed. Galileo quantified
the change in speed, which is acceleration, :math:`a = \frac{v_f - v_i}{t_f -
t_i} = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t} = \frac{dv}{dt}`. We will use the Greek letter
delta for the symbol to represent "change." It is always the "final minus
initial" values. Just a few decades later, Isaac Newton would build upon
Galileo's work to figure out that forces cause accelerations.

What other sorts of natural phenomena might be describable by an equation? The
answer is: all of them. We find out more accurately how nature works when we
make measurements and discover the equations that describe those measurements.
This is the goal of the physicist. Every scientist is seeking the "mother
load," which is to be the first person to understand a newly-found aspect of
nature. Each new understanding clears up previous confusion and opens new doors
of inquiry. Remember also that nature nearly always has more imagination then
us, we rarely predict ahead of time how nature behaves: we instead go measure
nature and are surprised by the result. Science means facts and understandings
obtained from repeatable measurements-billions of measurements have been made.
These are the most important points of the course.

Lets look one-by-one at distance, time, speed, and acceleration. A goal of this
chapter is for us to gain an understanding of the physical meaning of speed and
acceleration.

Time
----

Time is measured in seconds. We sometimes count seconds by counting out loud:
"one thousand, two thousand." The time that elapses between heartbeats is about
three-fourths seconds.

Lifetimes typically last for about one billion heart beats, no matter the
species or heart rate. In general, the larger the animal, the slower the heart
rate. Small animals having heart rates ten times the human rate and have
lifetimes that are one-tenth as long as a human's lifetime.

Example:
How many seconds are in a year?

.. math::

   \frac{60sec}{min} \cdot \frac{60min}{hour} \cdot \frac{24hours}{day} \cdot
   \frac{365days}{year}

When estimating calculations, a year has about :math:`\pi \times 10^7` seconds.

Example:
How many years are there in a billion seconds?

:math:`\frac{10^9 s}{3.15 \times 10^7 \frac{sec}{year}} = 31.7` years.

The age of the Earth is 4.5 billion years or :math:`1.5 \times 10^{17}`
seconds, and the age of the universe is 13 billion years or :math:`4 \times
10^{17}` seconds.

CQ: What is the duration of the trajectory of this tossed item? For how many
seconds have you lived?

Distance
--------

Distance is a measure of how far you have traveled and is written with the
symbol 'x'. Distance is measured in meters and sometimes stated in terms of
kilometers or miles and such. One mile is 1.6 kilometers. Let's look at the
size of millimeters and centimeters on this meter stick. Let's look though Jeff
Phillips' list of order-of-magnitude estimates of times, lengths, masses,
speeds, accelerations, forces, and energies for various objects. Let's look at
the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory's visual tour through the powers of
ten, from the Universe, to the Milky Way Galaxy, and down to the subatomic
universe of electrons and protons. By the way, the NASA Worldwind website lets
you zoom from satellite altitude down to any location on the Earth-down to
street level for many U.S. cities.

CQ: What is the length of your desk top? What is the width of this room? How
far do you live from the classroom?

Velocity
--------

Velocity is a measure of how fast you are traveling past something else and is
written with the symbol :math:`v`. Speed is measured in :math:`m/s` (pronounced
meters per second, just as 6 slices of pie per 2 persons is written 6 pieces/2
persons = 3 pieces/person). The speed of a car is 60 mph = 100 km/h. When a car
moves at a constant speed-say 20 m/s-its position is changing by a constant
amount-20 meters, in this example-every second, even between the seventh and
eighth seconds. By the way, fingernails grow and continents drift at a speed of
about 2 cm/year. Speed is always measured relative to something else, which in
turn may or may not be in motion relative to something else. For example, a
child might walk across your lap while you are sitting in a car that is passing
another car along a row of houses. Suppose that you stand on a moving continent
and point one finger in the direction of the continent's motion and another
opposite its motion. With what speed do the fingernails on these two hands then
move?


The definition of velocity is

.. math::

   v = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{X_{final} - X_{initial}}{t_{final} -
   t_{initial}} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t_f - t_i}.

Velocity = change in position / change in time. It is a measure of how quickly
the position of an object is changing.

The change :math:`\Delta` is always "final minus initial." We often choose
subscripts 0 and 1 to represent the two values or drop the "final" subscript on
one variable. The numerical value of speed calculated from this equation is
independent of the axis origin. One stationary observer might put :math:`x = 0`
in Los Angeles (Pacific time) while another puts :math:`x = 0` in Natchitoches
(Central time) but both calculate the same speed. For example, the Natchitoches
observer sees a car at :math:`x_i = 50` miles at time :math:`t_i = 5` hours and
then is at position :math:`x_f = 150` miles at time :math:`t_f = 7` hours. Its
speed is then

.. math::

   v = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t_f - t_i} = \frac{150 - 50
   miles}{7 - 5 h} = 50 mph.

The same numerical speed is calculated by the observer sitting in Los Angeles,
2000 miles away using clocks shifted by two hours.

.. math::
   v = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t_f - t_i} = \frac{2150 - 2050
   miles}{5 - 3 h} = 50 mph.

Physicists require that models of nature be independent of the observers
coordinate system and independent of the observer's system of units (this is
gauge theory).

CQ: Use the ruler and stop watch to measure your own walking speed or the speed
of a bug or fly. (By the way, how does a fly go about landing on the ceiling?
Does it first invert while flying and then land while inverted?)

Example:
To convert speeds from mph to m/s, multiply by 0.44, or to convert m/s
to mph multiply by 2.25. For example, 10 m/s = 22.5 mph.

.. math::

   \frac{1 mile}{hour} \cdot \frac{1.6 km}{mile} \cdot \frac{1000m}{km} \cdot
   \frac{1 hour}{3600s} = 0.44 \frac{km}{s}

CQ:
Show that 60 mph = 88 ft/s. This means that 600 mph = 880 ft/s.

.. math::

   \frac{60 miles}{hour} \cdot \frac{5280 ft}{mile} \cdot \frac{1 hour}{3600s}
   = 88 \frac{ft}{s}

Example:

What is the speed of blood flowing in your arm? When I plug and release the
vein in my arm here, I see blood move 0.05 m in 0.25 s. Its speed is then
:math:`v = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{0.05 m}{0.25 s} = 0.2 \frac{m}{s}`.

CQ: If a dog runs 100 meters in 20 seconds then its speed :math:`v =
\frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = 100 m / 20 s = 5 m/s`

Example:

The speed of light is :math:`3 \times 10^8 \frac{m}{s}`. At this speed, how
many times, :math:`n`, in one second would light travel a distance equal to the
circumference of the Earth? The radius of the Earth is :math:`r_e = 6.37 \times
10^6 m` and its circumference is `H = 2\pi r = ( 2 )( 3.14 )( 6.37 \times 10^6
m ) = 4.00 x 10^7 m`. The distance light moves is given by :math:`x = vt = ct =
nH`. Solve for :math:`n = \frac{ct}{H} = \frac{3 \times 10^8 m/s \cdot 1
s}{4.00 \times 10^7 m} = 7.5`.

Distinguish average from instantaneous speed: get into your car, turn it on,
speed up, drive 10 miles at 60 mph, passing at 70 mph and slowing to 40 mph for
animals, then stop and get out. Picture this motion by putting yourself into
that car making that trip. You will have an "average speed = total distance
traveled /total time" but at any instant your "instantaneous speed" might have
been any number between 0 and 70 mph.

We have a speed if our location is changing, otherwise we are not moving. What
is the difference between speed and acceleration? We have an acceleration if
our velocity is changing.

Acceleration
------------

Acceleration is a measure of how quickly a speed is changing. It is written
with the symbol 'a' and is measured in :math:`\frac{m}{s^2}` (pronounced meters
per second squared). Moving at constant acceleration means your speed increases
by a constant amount per unit of time. The definition of acceleration is

.. math::
   a = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t}

Acceleration = change in speed / change in time. It is a measure of how quickly
the speed of an object is changing.

`Here
<http://www.ac.wwu.edu/~vawter/PhysicsNet/Topics/Kinematics/AccelerationValues.html>`_
and `here <http://myweb.lmu.edu/jphillips/101_s03/orders.html>`_ are some
sample values of acceleration.

Example: A person jumps off a platform and experiences a vertical increase in
speed of 4.9 m/s in 0.5s. The acceleration of the person is

.. math::

   a = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t} = \frac{v_f - v_i}{t_f - t_i} = \frac{4.9
   \frac{m}{s} - 0 \frac{m}{s}}{0.5s} = 9.8 \frac{m}{s^2}

We use the symbol 'g' to represent this acceleration due to gravity.

Example: It `takes the Shuttle 50 seconds
<http://www.nasa.gov/mp4/151590main_121_launch_fixed_vodcast.mp4>`_ to reach a
speed of 750 mph, 1 minute 47 seconds to reach a speed of 2600 mph, and 8.5
minutes to reach 17,000 mph. What is its average acceleration at each of these
three points? We multiply 750, 2600, and 17,000 mph by 0.44 to obtain 333.3,
1156, and 7560 m/s. The acceleration is then :math:`a = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta
t} = \frac{333.3 m/s}{50 s} = 6.7 \frac{m}{s^2}`, which is 6.7/9.8 = 0.7g,
:math:`a = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t} = \frac{1156 m/s}{60 + 47 s} = 10.8
\frac{m}{s^2}`, which is 10.8/9.8 = 1.1 g, and :math:`a = \frac{\Delta
v}{\Delta t} = \frac{7560 m/s}{8.5 \times 60 s} = 14.8 m/s^2`, which is
14.8/9.8 = 1.5g. For a period just before the engines are cutoff, its
acceleration grows to 3g.

We have no sensation of speed but we feel acceleration in an elevator as it
starts or stops. As you push the "accelerator pedal" to speed up to get onto
the highway, you see the speedometer reading increase and you feel the
acceleration as your back is pressed into the car seat, making you feel
"heavier." (On page 44 of The Sciences, An Integrated Approach (James Trefil
and Robert M. Hazen, 2004, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Trefil describes his
experience of g-forces as being similar to having multiple persons sitting on
you all at once. Trefil and jet pilots say that a 5g acceleration feels like
five people sitting on top of you.) If this press stays constant then the
acceleration is constant. If you press and release the peddle several times,
you are thrown into and out of the seat and will feel the acceleration change
in an irritating way. Can acceleration change? Yes, but not in this course. We
want to understand the meaning of acceleration and not bury it for no reason
with complicated mathematics. If acceleration changes then the motion equations
given below do not apply; instead, calculus must be used to obtain other forms
of these equations. The time rate of change of acceleration has been aptly
named "jerk." This is of interest in the design of public transportation
vehicles but very few natural phenomenon involve the rate of change of
acceleration. While driving our cars, we might accelerate gently and feel a
gentle push, or press the pedal to the floor to produce a high 'a' and feel
strongly pressed into the chair of the car. By the way, the time rate of change
of a is called jerk--because we do feel a jerking motion. You'll feel
:math:`\frac{da}{dt}` if you quickly press and release the gas pedal several
times.

Acceleration is caused by force
-------------------------------

In everyday life, we describe a force as a push or a pull. Isaac Newton, who
will be the hero of the next chapter, combined and extended the motion studies
of Kepler, Galileo, and others by stating that force equals mass times
acceleration, :math:`F = ma`. Mass :math:`m` resists the acceleration. The
gravitational force between you and the Earth results in your weight, :math:`W
= mg`. When you drop an object, its weight is the force that causes its
acceleration. We have :math:`F = ma = mg`. We cancel the :math:`m` and see that
all weights fall with the same acceleration, :math:`a = g`, as was Galileo's
rumor. When the force is constant then the acceleration is constant, and we
have :math:`a = F/m`.

The motion equations for constant acceleration
----------------------------------------------

For constant acceleration, the average speed occurs at the midpoint of a time
interval

.. math::

   v_{ave} = \frac{v + v_0}{2}.

(This is seen in the graph of a straight line. We use this fact in labs
involving spark tape).

Let's set :math:`t_f = 0` and drop the subscript on :math:`t_i` so that
:math:`v_{ave} = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t_f - t_i}`
becomes

.. math::

   v_{ave} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t},

which can be written as :math:`x_f = x_i + v_{ave} t`, or, since one subscript
is easier than two,

.. math::

   x = x_0 + v_{ave} t.

Notice that we can solve this for :math:`t` to get :math:`t = \frac{v -
v_0}{a}`.

Substitute this :math:`v` in the equation :math:`x = x_0 + v_{ave} t = x_0 +
(v + v_0)t/2` to get

.. math::

   x = x_0 + \frac{(v_0 + at + v_0)t}{2} = x_0 + \frac{(2v_0 + at)t}{2} = x_0 +
   v_0t + \frac{1}{2}at^2.

If instead of substituting :math:`v` in the above equation, we can instead
substitute :math:`t` as noted to get,

.. math::

   x = x_0 + \frac{(v + v_0)t}{2} = x_0 + \frac{(v + v_0)(v - v_0)}{2a}

or

.. math::

   v^2 = v_0^2 + 2a(x-x_0).

Galileo's measurements of motion down inclined planes resulted in the following
so-called motion equations that we use to describe motion under constant
acceleration.

#) :math:`x = x_0 + v_0 t + \frac{1}{2} at^2` (notice that this is a quadratic
   equation in t and so has two solutions)
#) :math:`v = v_0 + at`
#) :math:`v^2 = v_0^2 + 2a(x-x_0)`
#) :math:`x = x_0 + \frac{1}{2}(v + v_0)t`
#) :math:`\bar{v} = (v_0 + v) / 2` (for linear relations, the average occurs at
   the midpoint of an interval).

Notice that when :math:`x_0 = 0` and :math:`v_0 = 0` these equations become
:math:`x = \frac{1}{2}at^2`, :math:`v = at`, and :math:`v^2 = 2ax`.

This looks like five equations but it is really only two independent equations
plus three rearrangements. For these two equations, we can have only two
unknowns.

It does not matter what is the object-from falling coins to rocket ships-the
motion of any object moving with constant acceleration can be described by
these motion equations. In these equations, :math:`x` represents the distance
an object has moved in time :math:`t` from its starting place, :math:`x_0`. The
object's speed is represented by :math:`v` and its initial speed by
:math:`v_0`. Speed is visualized in terms of how quickly an object's position
is changing. Notice that :math:`x` represents *how far* an object has moved
while :math:`v` represents *how fast* it is moving or how quickly the object's
*position* is changing while acceleration represents how quickly its *speed* is
changing in time. Speed is the time rate of change of *position* while
acceleration is the time rate of change of *speed*. In symbols, speed :math:`v=
\Delta x / \Delta t`, where the change in position is :math:`\Delta x =
X_{final} - X_{initial}`, and :math:`a = \Delta v / \Delta t`. (In calculus,
differential changes are used, making :math:`v = dx/dt` and :math:`a = dv/dt =
d^2x/dt^2`.)

Example:

Suppose a car is accelerated from a stopped position to a speed of 20 m/s (45
mph) in 10 seconds. Its acceleration is :math:`a = \Delta v / \Delta t = ( 20
m/s ) / 10 s = 2 m/s^2` and it will have traveled a distance

.. math::

   x = \frac{1}{2}at^2 = ( \frac{1}{2} )( 2 m/s^2 )( 10s )2 = 100 m (109 yards).

Compared to your own driving style, does this seem like a high or low rate of
acceleration? Do you typically accelerate from 0 to 20 m/s (45 mph) in 10
seconds while traveling just 100 meters?
